In the last lesson, we talked about the ViewController lifecycle. And we've seen methods like
viewDidLoad, viewDidDisappear,
all of these in action. The iOS operating system automatically calls these methods as a ViewController
is being created, it becomes visible, or recedes into the background.
But ViewController is just a single screen, right?
So what about the app as a whole?
Well, for that, we need to zoom out a bit and look at the bigger picture.
We need to look at the application lifecycle. And the app's lifecycle usually starts with the app being
launched, to the app being visible, and then the app receding into the background.
And finally, the app being destroyed and the resources reclaimed for other apps.
That last part is actually a key to understanding how iOS works. Resources like CPU time or memory
are limited, and the operating system always has to decide how to allocate these resources.
So how does iOS decide what to prioritize?
Well, it prioritizes whichever app is running in the foreground because that's what the user is looking
at,
and that's what they're using right now.
But why does this matter to you as the app developer.
Why should you care about the app lifecycle?
Well, imagine your users are playing your game and they just beat a boss, or your user's just filed a super
long registration form,
if your app now goes into the background and iOSdecides to reallocate your app's memory to another
app, then your users will lose all of their progress and all their data, unless you've already saved the
app's data.
But how would you know at which time point to save your user's data?
Well, you should do it at the point in the lifecycle when your app is going into the background. So that's
one example.
But thinking back to our chat application and working with Firebase, we've come across another use case
for the lifecycle methods as well.
So you need to do something before any other part of the code in your app is executed. Well, in the case
of our chat application,
the very first thing we needed to do was to configure the app. And that's why we added
Firebaseapp.configure into the application:didFinishLaunchingWithOptions lifecycle method.
That way, we can figure our app and read the GoogleService-info.plist from the disk before anything
else could happen.
So that means application:didFinishLaunchingWithOptions,
this helped us respond to the event of our app being launched and guarantee that this code was executed
before anything else.
So where can we find these app lifecycle methods?
If we take a look at our bog-standard sort of template for any iOS app, you'll see that from iOS 13
and any new apps created using Xcode 11,
you get a AppDelegate and a SceneDelegate file for free.
Anytime you create a new iOS app, it's in these two files,
the AppDelegate.swift and the SceneDelegate.swift files that the app lifecycle methods are
found.
So what's the difference between these two files and what's a scene anyways?
Now, previous to Xcode 11, we only had one file which was the AppDelegate and this was the file
where the iOS operating system would let our app know which point we were in in terms of the app
lifecycle.
So that's how it was for iOS 12 and below, all the lifecycle methods used to be in the AppDelegate
Swift.
But as of iOS 13, and especially with iPadOS, apps now can run in multiple windows.
What this means is that there can be multiple windows running different instances of your app.
In other words, there are two separate scenes.
That's why we now get a SceneDelegate that reports back to us on the lifecycle of each of these windows.
If one of the windows goes into the background, then the SceneDelegate for that window gets notified.
So if you're a developer who's come from iOS 11 or iOS 12
development,
don't be surprised by this SceneDelegate.
All it does is it treats each of these windows being open as a separate scene. So the way works in apps
that support scenes is that events that are common to the app are handled in the ApplicationDelegate
and all the other lifecycle callbacks are in the SceneDelegate.
So what's common to the app as a whole and handled by the application delegate?
Well, it's things like being launched or receiving a time change from the network carrier. And what about
the SceneDelegate?
What does the SceneDelegate handle?
Well, it'll be things like a window becoming visible or going into the background.
This is very similar to the view controller in a way. The way that it all fits together is you can have
multiple ViewControllers in one scene, and you can have multiple scenes in one application, and each
of these have lifecycle methods that you can override.
So let's take a look at some of these points which we can override.
For example, we've already seen in the FlashChat app that we can tap into this didFinishLaunchingWithOptions
method in order to set up Firebase or create a new database or whatever it is that we need
to do as soon as the app launches. And then later on at other points of lifecycle,
for example, if our app was interrupted by a phone call, right,
let's say, mom calls us, and we were in the middle of filling in a form, then it's a good idea for the
apps developers to put some code in here to deal with any of these temporary interruptions.
So let's say that we were playing some music in Spotify and a phone call comes in,
then it's a pretty good idea to tap into these methods, and maybe pause the music, or turn the volume
down, or whatever it is that you may need to do.
And then there's other methods like sceneDidEnterBackground and this is the moment when your app
goes from the foreground to the background,
and this is a really good time to save a user's data. So if they were filling in a form and it so happens
that the app enters the background, then it's a good idea to actually save what they've typed in because
the next time point where the app actually gets destroyed can be unpredictable.
Let's say that the user decided to play fortnight on their phone and it's requesting a lot of resources,
then your app that's resting in the background might actually just get killed silently.
So as soon as your app or your scene enters the background, then you can use this part to save any data
that's associated with the user,
so you don't lose it.
And the next time that the scene enters the foreground or when the window comes back online,
then you can use the data saved there to repopulate any of the fields that might be empty. So similar
to before,
I've added some print statements in each of these methods so that we'll get to see at which time points
they get called.
Now, I'm using this syntax when writing print #function and what this will do is it will print
the name of the function.
So in this case, it will be application: didFinishLaunchingWithOptions.
So let's go ahead and hit run and see which of these methods get called when.
So notice how
as soon as my app launches, the first thing that happens before anything else, before viwDidLoad, or
before anything like that, is the application: didFinishLaunchingWithOptions.
So that's the first entry point.
Next, it calls scene (_:willConnectTo: options:) which is what creates our new scene and shows this
new window. Next, we actually see some methods from the ViewController.
So the viewDidLoad being called, viewWillAppear being called, and in-between viewDidAppear and
viewWillAppear, our scene enters the foreground and becomes active.
Now, the next things that I do inside my ViewController don't affect the app lifecycle. But if I go ahead
and bring my app into the multitasking screen like so, then you can see that my sceneWillResignActive
has now been triggered.
Now, if at this point I navigate to a different app, then you can see that my scene actually enters the
background.
Now, don't worry if you see a warning message like what I've got here, it seems to be a bug in its Xcode
itself, and it's actually not related to the warning that it's giving you.
Hopefully, at some point, the Apple team will fix this and you won't actually have to look at this warning
message. But in case you are, don't worry, it's nothing related to what you've done.
So, now that my scene has entered the background, if I go ahead and find it on my home screen and launch
it again, you can see that the scene now enters the foreground and becomes active.
But if instead of navigating to a different app, but instead, I actually just click-drag and throw it
away, then that destroys my application and the application(_:didDiscardSceneSessions:) gets triggered.
And this is a point where my app gets killed.
So all of these different time points are there for you to tap into
depending on what needs you have. And if you want something to happen before something else happens or
after something else happens, then you can use a variation of the app lifecycle methods, the SceneDelegate
lifecycle methods, and the ViewController lifecycle methods to be able to achieve this.
So I hope that's been informative.
If you want even more details on the app lifecycle or the ViewController lifecycle, then be sure to
check out the course resources page where there are some links to some extra reading if you want to
know more.
But now that we've completed the FlashChat app, it's time to review the code that you've written.
And if there's anything in there that you don't understand, then be sure to review the lessons where we talked
about them so that you are ready to move on to even more advanced stages in the next modules.
So that's all from me for this module and I hope to see you on the next one.